Home schooling in the Greeneville and Greene County area may be increasing.
According to figures provided by the Tennessee Department of Education, the number of home-schoolers registered with the Greeneville City Schools System has increased since the 2014-15 school year.
According to information on the Tennessee Department of Education website, parents or legal guardians in the state who want to home-school students must register with their local school system. The information is then compiled by the state.
There are three options for registering in Tennessee - as an independent home school, with an umbrella school or through an accredited online school. The requirements for each option are available on the Tennessee Department of Education's website at tn.gov/education/topic/home-schooling-in-tn.
In 2014-2015, 24 students inside the city schools district registered with the state as an independent home school. That number dipped to 16 for the 2015-16 school year before climbing to 32 in 2016-17.
There was a corresponding increase in home-schooled students enrolled through private schools, with six registered in 2014-2015, five in 2015-2016 and 14 in 2016-2017.
Greeneville City Schools Chief Student Services Officer Jeff Townsley provided different numbers, but they showed the same trend toward an increase in home school enrollment. An explanation of why the figures differed could not be obtained from the Tennessee Department of Education as of press time.
Townsley provided the following figures:
2010-11: 18
2011-12: 14
2012-13: 13
2013-14: 21
2014-15 : 30
2015-16: 28
2016-17: 49
2017-18: 33 so far, but that number could potentially increase throughout the school year.
"The last two years, we've definitely seen an increase from where it was in the four or five years for certain," Townsley said.
More easily accessible resources may be the reason, according to him.
"I think it's probably more online options," he said. "I think it's easier for parents to access curriculums. The process has been streamlined at the state as well. Some of those things may make it easier for parents to do home schooling."
The number of home schoolers effects the schools system, according to Townsley.
"There's definitely an impact on our enrollment numbers, which drives our funding," Townsley said. "If we see a decrease in enrollment for students pulling out to do home schooling, it certainly does affect us."
Kim Reeves is on the Board of Directors for the Heritage Home Scholars Co-op, a nonprofit that provides support, activities and cooperative classes for members. She differed with Townsley's assertion that school system lose money when more students home school.
"They're just not gaining," Reeves said.
Whatever the effect on enrollment, Townsley said he supports parents' right to choose their child's education.
"From my point of view, I think that home schooling is a right that each individual family has," he said. "That's a decision they have to make for what they feel is best for their own child. Certainly we believe that Greeneville City Schools provides a great education. We offer a lot of programs that we feel like addresses every student's needs. But again, they have the right to make their own choice for individual child."
The Greene County Schools System has seen a decrease in independent home school enrollments. According to state figures, in 2014-15 there were 107 students registered in independent home schools. In 2015-16 that dropped to 72 and in 2016-17 it went down to 67.
The number of home-schoolers registered through private schools in the county increased over the same time period, with 350 during the 2014-15 school year, 342 in 2015-16 and 369 in 2016-17.
Figures independently tabulated by from the Greene County School System could not be obtained by the time this article went to print.
"I think it's hard to identify a trend because home-schoolers are all very different," Reeves said. "Everybody home-schools very, very differently. I do think there's been a slight uptick in people who are homeschooling, but that's very difficult to prove statistically."
She explained that it's hard to pin down numbers because of all the ways people can register and because some families may choose not to register at all even, though registration is required to legally homeschool.
Another trend in home schooling may be diversity in home-schooling families and the desire to explore more educational options to fit a particular family or student's needs.
"I think one trend is for more academic concentration," Reeves said. "It's not just for religious reasons anymore (such as) 'I don't want the school influencing my child.' That type of thing. I think now it's (different). We have people home-schooling for academics. It has nothing to do with their religious beliefs."
She added: "It's difficult when you have a classroom of 25 children. You have to teach to the middle and somebody's going to fall through the cracks, and you're going to miss somebody's gift. It's just the nature of the beast. That's what we've chosen to do differently."
The Heritage co-op is a Christian organization but includes families from "pretty much all the denominations," according to Reeves.
"How we address that is we stand on scripture as doctrine, but we don't teach doctrine, nor do we teach scripture at co-op to avoid the inevitable arguments," she explained. "People homeschool for as many different reasons as you could possibly think of."
Reeves and other board members from Heritage pointed out that although education in Tennessee on the whole ranks very low nationally, the local school systems rank higher.
"Particularly in the city school system, we've got a great option and Greene County has really stepped up," said Reeves, who also pointed out that a daughter of one of the board members attends South Greene High School.
Home school families and school systems sometimes work together to meet students needs. According to Reeves, home schooled students from the Heritage co-op have participated in public school sports.
"One of the limitations of home schooling is that there's not enough of us to make a huge (sports) team but we do have a very competitive high school girls' volleyball team," she said.
According to Reeves, some students from the co-op have played soccer, golf, bowling, football and baseball with the public school systems.
"The Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association now has what they call a Homeschool Rule," Townsley said. "It guarantees (home school students) the right to try out for a team. It doesn't guarantee participation but it does give them the opportunity to try out if they are registered with our school district.
"We currently have three home-school students that participate with Greeneville City Schools and their athletic programs. We have one with volleyball and two with cross country.
Townsley said that the city school system doesn't currently offer partial enrollments to take academic classes but that two home school students are enrolled at the Greene Technology Center.
