After latest shooting, let's talk about mental health instead of you-know-what.
I'm not going to bring up gun control.
We're still under the "too soon" rule from last week's massacre during Sunday service at a Texas church, so it's certainly too soon to talk about guns in connection to Tuesday's shooting spree. Maybe you didn't hear about that one - such things tend to come and go with little fanfare these days.
It happened in Northern California. A man with a semi-automatic rifle and two handguns started randomly shooting people all over a small town, including at an elementary school. Five people were killed and at least two children were wounded, one of them at the school.
There's no motive yet, just reports of a neighborhood dispute.
Phil Johnston, assistant sheriff of Tehama County, told reporters: "This is an individual that armed himself with the motive of getting even with his neighbor and just went on a rampage. I don't know how to describe it to you any different."
Maybe that's because these tragedies all start to sound the same: some random guy; an inexplicable outburst of violence; lives shattered.
Remember, I'm keeping quiet about the firearms. One has to be respectful.
Instead, I'm going to talk about mental health.
The wise folks, the ones who tell us guns aren't the problem when it comes to a Texan shooting 26 people to death in a church or a Nevadan opening fire from a hotel window in Las Vegas and killing 58 people and injuring hundreds more, say mass shootings are a mental health issue. Period.
I'm inclined to agree with that, except for the "period" part. There's more than that to blame, but it involves something I'm not talking about right now because it's too soon.
So let's just say mental health is a factor when it comes to murderous rampages. Law enforcement officials say the Northern California shooter tried to get into the elementary school to shoot more kids but was stopped because the school was on lockdown. Nobody's going to convince me a person capable of such a thing is sane.
So we have a mental health problem in this country. We're reminded of that after every mass shooting. Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle extend their thoughts and prayers, those who line their pockets with cash from the National Rifle Association say guns aren't the problem and everyone brings up mental health and says it must be addressed.
But it doesn't get addressed, at least not in any significant way.
Nothing changes with that other thing - the one that it's too soon to speak about - either, but since there seems to be agreement on the mental health issue, let me ask this: Why no action?
It feels like we're being played.
A New York Times story from September 2013, in the wake of the Washington Navy Yard shooting, read: "Despite deep divisions that have kept Congress from passing new gun safety laws for almost two decades, there is one aspect of gun control on which many Democrats, Republicans and even the National Rifle Association agree: the need to give mental health providers better resources to treat dangerous people and prevent them from buying weapons."
Yeah, that didn't really go anywhere. Republicans worried it might be a back door to tighter laws on purchases of those things I'm not talking about and Democrats worried Republicans might use it as an excuse to not pass tighter laws on purchases of those things I'm not talking about and everyone just gave up and started waiting for the next mass shooting to roll around.
Tragedy. Outrage. Too soon. Mental health reform. Nothing. Repeat.
It has been only a month and a half since the Las Vegas massacre, which was followed by the Texas church shooting and now this shooting spree in California. That's 89 people dead and hundreds injured.
If we're going to declare mental health the real problem behind these shootings, it seems fair to say America is facing a mental health crisis.
What has happened this year, as bodies continue to hit the ground at concerts and in churches and elementary schools, is this: Republican lawmakers tried to repeal Obamacare, proposing a phaseout of the law's Medicaid expansion that provides mental health care for hundreds of thousands of Americans. The law also makes employer health care plans cover mental health services on the same level as medical services.
Obamacare repeal failed, but now Republicans are trying to push through a tax cut package that would sabotage the health care law by eliminating the individual mandate, which the Congressional Budget Office says would cause millions of Americans to lose their health care.
I thought mental health was the big problem. I thought that was the thing we were supposed to be talking about in the wake of a tragedy like the one Tuesday in California.
After the Texas church shooting, President Donald Trump said: "I think that mental health is your problem here. We have a lot of mental health problems in our country, as do other countries. But this isn't a guns situation."
It's good it's not a guns situation, because we're not allowed to talk about those things. We can only talk about mental health.
What I don't understand, then, is why the people talking about mental health in the wake of a mass shooting never seem to do anything to make our mental health care system better.
I almost think they're trying to distract us, hoping thoughts and prayers will be good enough.
But people keep dying. And those thoughts and prayers aren't solving anything.